# Analysis of Polar Bear Diets in the Chukchi & Beaufort Sea


## Summary
This project fulfills the requirements for the final project of ENV872: Environmental Data Exploration at Duke University in Fall 2024. The requirements of the project are to perform different forms of analysis that have been learned throughout the course on a dataset of your own choosing. The final output should be a visually pleasing version of this analysis without code.

Using a dataset obtained from the United States Geological Survey (USGS) website (more specifically from the Alaska Science Center), we performed various forms of data anlysis on a dataset cataloguing the carbon and nitrogen isotope concentrations found in polar bear hair samples in the Chukchi and Beaufort Sea. The period for obtaining these samples are as follows: Chukchi Sea samples (Russia/Alaska) were collected from periods of 1987-1989 and 2008-2017 and Beaufort Sea samples (Alaska) were collected from periods of 1983-1989 and 2004-2016. This information is important because it could give researchers insight into whether the diet of polar bears has changed over time in Alaska. sotope concentrations also indicate whether the polar bears rely on terrestrial vs. marine prey and if this has changed over time. 

## Investigators
Andrew Barfield, 1st-year MEM at Duke's Nicholas School andrew.barfield@duke.edu

Kendall Fitzgerald, 1st-year MEM at Duke's Nicholas School
kendall.fitzgerald@duke.edu

Priya Rathod, 1st-year MEM at Duke's Nicholas School 
priya.rathod@duke.edu

## Keywords
Polar Bears, isotopes, hair, spatial analysis, time series 

## Database Information
The data in this repository is from Alaska Science Center, and was accessed via the United States Geological Society (USGS) website on December 1st. Spatial data was generated by Kendall Fitzgerald, descriptive statistics and linear regression were done by Priya Rathod, and times series analysis was done by Andrew Barfield. 

## Folder structure, file formats, and naming conventions
The repository has the final .Rmd file that has all of the coding and information for the project, titled "BarfieldFitzgeraldRathod_ENV872_Project.Rmd" There is also a matching .html file of the same name that is the final output of the project. 

It also has a Data folder that has a Raw and Processed folder inside of it. The Raw folder contains the original .csv file that all analysis has been made from and the Processed folder contains all processed codes in RScript of the various analysis that has been performed on the data. 

## Metadata

polarBear_CNisotopesHair_beaufortChukchi_rode_1983_2017.csv

Column Name                   | Description.                                                                                                                                  | Class
:-----------------------------|:----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|:-----
BearID                        | Unique numerical identifier for each bear                                                                                                     | integer   
Sex                           | The sex of the bear determined at capture                                                                                                     | Factor
Age                           | The age of bear determined through teeth or best estimate                                                                                     | Factor
Capture.Date                  | The date bear was captured and hair was collected                                                                                             | Factor
Year                          | The year bear was captured and sampled                                                                                                        | integer
Pop                           | Subpopulation boundary where bear was captured                                                                                                | Factor
TypicalSummerHabitat          | Whether bear summered on ice or land (only for Chukchi Sea bears)                                                                             | Factor
SummerHabitatDuringHairGrowth | Whether bear summered on ice or land based on sample                                                                                          | Factor
Lat                           | Latitude of capture (decimal degrees)                                                                                                         | numeric
Long                          | Longitude of capture (decimal degrees)                                                                                                        | numeric
d15N.Air                      | Stable nitrogen (15N/14N) isotope ratios in δ notation, as parts per thousand (‰) deviation from the primary standard, atmospheric air        | numeric 
d13C.VPDB                     | Stable carbon (13C/12C) isotope ratios in δ notation, as parts per thousand (‰) deviation from the primary standards Vienna Pee Dee Belemnite | numeric
Percent.N                     | The percent of nitrogen by mass measured in the hair                                                                                          | numeric
Percent.C                     | The percent carbon by mass measured in the hair                                                                                               | numeric


## Scripts and code
Code has been divided into separate RScript files in the Processed folder under Data. Cleaned data has its own folder, Spatial data has its own folder, Linear Regression has its own folder, and times series analysis has its own folder.  
